Update ICRC-28 and 34 (#191)
dfinity/wg-identity-authentication: topics/icrc_34_delegation.md

# ICRC-34: Delegation

[![Status Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/STATUS-DRAFT-ffcc00.svg)](https://github.com/orgs/dfinity/projects/31)
[![Extension Badge](https://img.shields.io/badge/EXTENDS-ICRC--25-ffcc222.svg)](./icrc_25_signer_interaction_standard.md)
[![Standard Issue](https://img.shields.io/badge/ISSUE-ICRC--34-blue?logo=github)](https://github.com/dfinity/wg-identity-authentication/issues/115)

<!-- TOC -->
* [ICRC-34: Delegation](#icrc-34-delegation)
  * [Summary](#summary)
  * [Method](#method)
  * [Scope (according to the ICRC-25 standard)](#scope-according-to-the-icrc-25-standard)
    * [Example RPC Permission Request](#example-rpc-permission-request)

>   * [icrc-25-supported-standards](#icrc-25-supported-standards)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * [icrc25_supported_standards](#icrc25_supported_standards)
```

  * [Request params](#request-params)
    * [Example RPC Delegation Request](#example-rpc-delegation-request)
  * [Result](#result)
    * [Example RPC Delegation Response](#example-rpc-delegation-response)
  * [Message Processing](#message-processing)
  * [Errors](#errors)
<!-- TOC -->

## Summary

When a relying party wants to avoid going through the signer and user approval for each individual call, it can use the icrc34_delegation method described below. 

> This method generates a delegation chain, an object with a stable identifier, allowing the relying party to sign transactions on behalf of the user without having to go through the signer and user approval. This also means the signer does not need to stay connected to the signer to make calls on behalf of the user.

Reviewer: Cutting out some repetition:

```suggestion
This method generates a delegation chain, an object with a stable identifier, allowing the relying party to independently sign transactions on behalf of the user. This also means the signer does not need to stay connected to the signer to make calls on behalf of the user.
```

The delegation chain's stable identifier can be either: 

> 1. **Account Delegation**: an identity that may hold tokens and other assets.

Reviewer: That property is not exclusive to account delegations, see the current ecosystem of in-dapp wallets.

I think the crucial point is that it is stable across many relying parties (but restricted by `targets`).

And further, if it does hold assets, the delegation _must not_ give the relying party access to them.

Maybe: "Restricted access to the signers identity, such that it is stable across many relying parties but cannot be used to operate on tradable assets and shared infrastructure"

> 2. **Relying Party Delegation**: an identity designed exclusively for the relying party (Relying Party Delegation).

Reviewer: I think "designed" is the wrong term? 

```suggestion
2. **Relying Party Delegation**: an identity created exclusively for the relying party (Relying Party Delegation).
```

Example use cases of a Relying Party Delegation:
- Signer could give the user a choice to stay anonymous with a service.

> - Differentiate between calls made with user approval (Account identifier) and without user approval (Relying Party Delegation identifier). Allowing for fine grained security levels per identifier on the Relying Party platform.

Reviewer: This is true for ledgers as well (i.e. `icrc2_approve`):

```suggestion
- Differentiate between calls made with user approval (Account identifier) and without user approval (Relying Party Delegation identifier), allowing for fine grained security levels per identifier.
```

- Exclusive identifier within the Relying Party platform to stay isolated from identifiers of other Relying Party platforms.

> If a relying party wants to receive an Account Delegation, the `icrc34_delegation` request **MUST** include canisters it

Reviewer: The "it controls" part is not a requirement per ICRC-28, from the ICRC-28 perspective the developer must simply make sure it is not malicious.
If you want to explicitly restrict ICRC-28 to only be used by canisters under the exact same control structure, then that should be reflected there as well.

Author: updated

controls as `targets` where each canister **MUST** implement the `icrc28_trusted_origins` endpoint as per the 
[ICRC-28](./icrc_28_trusted_origins.md) standard.

> Relying Party Delegations **MUST** be restricted by the signer to individual relying parties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relying Party Delegations **MUST** be for identities exclusive to each individual relying party. This property **MUST** be enforced by the signer.
```

> Signers **COULD** give users the choice to authenticate with their relying party specific identifier instead of accounts (if available).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signers **MAY** give users the choice to authenticate with their relying party specific identifier instead of accounts (if available).
```

> Relying parties **MUST** remove targets if they want to be guaranteed to receive a Relying Party delegation.

Reviewer: As this is about conveying a preference I don't think the uppercase MUST is warranted here.

```suggestion
Relying parties must not include `targets` in the request if they want to be guaranteed to receive a Relying Party delegation.
```

## Method

**Name:** `icrc34_delegation`

> **Prerequisite:** Active session with granted permission scope `icrc34_delegation`.

Reviewer: I realize I need to make this change in the other extensions too...

```suggestion
**Prerequisite:** Granted permission scope `icrc34_delegation`.
```

  "params": {
    "scopes": [
      {
        "method": "icrc34_delegation"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## icrc25_supported_standards

An ICRC-25 compliant signer must implement the [icrc25_supported_standards](icrc_25_signer_interaction_standard.md#icrc25_supported_standards) method which returns the list of supported standards. 
Any signer implementing ICRC-34 must include a record with the name field equal to "ICRC-34" in that list.

## Request params

- `publicKey` (`text`): A DER encoded public key of a supported signature scheme, as described [here](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#signatures).
- `targets` (`text` `array` optional): A list of target canister ids (textual representation) Account Delegations can execute transactions
for on behalf of the user.
- `maxTimeToLive` (`text` optional): Expiration of the delegation in nanoseconds, though signer can still choose to
return a delegation with a shorter expiration.

### Example RPC Delegation Request

Requests for a delegation can optionally include `targets`, enabling signers to verify the security of returning an Account 

> Delegation (via ICRC-28). If the array of `targets` is empty, signers **SHOULD** only offer users the option to connect 

Reviewer: My intention was to make it clearer that this is _not_ the case where targets is `undefined`.

```suggestion
Delegation (via ICRC-28). If the array of `targets` is set to an empty array, signers **SHOULD** only offer users the option to connect 
```

## Message Processing

1. The relying party sends a `icrc34_delegation` request to the signer.
2. Upon receiving the request, the signer validates whether it can process the message.
    * If the relying party has not been granted the permission to request the action, the signer sends a response with
      an error back to the relying party.
    * The relying party must make sure that the request complies with scope targets restriction.

> 3. If the request includes targets, the signer **MAY** try to retrieve and verify the trusted origins according to the [ICRC-28](icrc_28_trusted_origins.md) specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. If the request includes targets, the signer **MAY** offer issuing an account delegation. If it does, it **MUST** retrieve and verify the trusted origins according to the [ICRC-28](icrc_28_trusted_origins.md) specification.
```

3. The signer tries to retrieve and verify the trusted origins according to the [ICRC-28](icrc_28_trusted_origins.md)
   specification.
3. If the request includes targets, the signer **MAY** try to retrieve and verify the trusted origins according to the [ICRC-28](icrc_28_trusted_origins.md) specification.
    * If the trusted origins cannot be retrieved for any of the given delegations targets or the relying party origin is
      not within any of the trusted origin lists, the signer rejects the request and send a response with an error code
      back to the relying party.
4. The signer returns a signed delegation to the relying party

```mermaid

> sequenceDiagram

Reviewer: Why did you drop the sequence diagram? I think it should still be included here.

Author: Added

> 5. The signer returns a signed delegation to the relying party.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. The signer returns the signed delegation to the relying party.
```

      an error back to the relying party.
    * The relying party must make sure that the request complies with scope targets restriction.
3. If the request includes targets, the signer **MAY** offer issuing an account delegation. If it does, it **MUST** retrieve and verify the trusted origins according to the [ICRC-28](icrc_28_trusted_origins.md) specification.
    * If the trusted origins cannot be retrieved for any of the given delegations targets or the relying party origin is
      not within any of the trusted origin lists, the signer does not give users the ability to continue with the Account Delegation.
4. The signer **MAY** display all the available delegations the user can continue with, in which case a user would select one.
5. The signer returns the signed delegation to the relying party.

```mermaid
  sequenceDiagram
    participant RP as Relying Party
    participant S as Signer
    participant C as Target Canister
    RP ->> S: Request delegation
    alt Relying party has not been granted <br>the `icrc34_delegation` permission scope<br>or the request does not comply with scope restrictions
        S ->> RP: Error response: Permission not granted (3000)

>     else Requests includes targets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    else Requests includes targets and signer supports account delegations
```
